---
layout: post
title:      "Some Thoughs on Systems Design"
date:       2020-04-21 19:31:03 -0400
permalink:  sd_basics1
---

> The Big Picture: Systems Design Basics - Part 1

While taking an online course on [**systems design**](https://www.educative.io/courses/grokking-the-system-design-interview), I learned some cool ideas worth sharing.


## Systems Design is About Thinking in Scale

When developing [Catoro](https://catoro.now.sh/), I focused a lot on the actual functionality of the application. However, it actually never came to my head thinking questions such as *what if I had 100 million total users and 2 million daily users?*. How will the design of my backend and deployment be affected by growth?

Systems design focus on **distributed systems** meaning a a system whose components are located on different networked computers. Some characteristic of such systems include Scalability, Reliability, Availability, Efficiency, and Serviceability/Manageability. There are also strategies of how to assess and design your system for scale.

## Capacity Estimation

Lets take our example of **Catoro, a coffee cupping app**. Coffee cupping must be read heavy, we can assume a 1:50 ratio between read and write.

**Traffic, Storage, Bandwidth Estimates**
If we assume there are 2M new cuppings per month this actually means about 50M readings same month:

`2 * 50 => 50M`

What about *queries per second (QPS)*? Roughly ~0.77. So about one new cupping **per second**!

`2M / (3600(secs in hour)* 24hours * 30days) =~ 1`

What about reading? Well with our 1:50 ratio it means 50 readings per second.

How about *storage*? 

Let's assume we'll store everything for five years. Since we have 2M every month we should expect to store roughly 120M!

`2M * 12months * 5years = 120M`

What about each particular cupping? Each cupping lets assume is 1KB of information since there are a lot of parameters to track per cupping as well as total score.

Since hour total storage is 120M we should expect roughly 120GB of storage just of cuppings.

`120M * 1KB =~ 120GB`

*Tip*: Try [**this**](https://whatsabyte.com/P1/byteconverter.htm) resource for a good byte/kb/gb etc. conversion tool.

Regardig bandwidth of *incoming* data we should expect roughly 1KB per second as our QPS is 1/s. Read requests about 50KB with our 1:50 ratio.

## Road Ahead for Catoro SD

In the next blog post we'll talk about the Database / Component Design. Tips for DB schema, REST API, Data Partitioning, Load Balancers, Telemetry and Cache for Catoro.

*Stay tuned*!