---
layout: post
title:      "Beating The Technical Interview"
# date:       2020-06-15 19:31:03 -0400
permalink:  copy_from_file_name222
filename: 2020-06-15-three_tier_architecture
---

> You've got this! 👊🏼

# Beating The Technical Interview

Last week (**link**) I shared my answer to a classical interview question from Facebook and my take on it using JavaScript. Today I'll talk about some interviewing tips when tackling with such technical questions!

## What To Expect

When called for an interview, you can expect one (or a combination) of the following formats:

- Coding challenges
  - Week long coding (or data) project
  - Timed technical assessment
  - HackerRank or Codility challenge
  - Data science case study 
- Technical phone screens
  - Trivia
  - Pair-programming
- In-person technical interviews
  - Trivia
  - White-boarding
  - Pair-programming

Be also prepared for common questions such as:

- What is your understanding of *X_ROLE*?
- Describe your ideal day at work?
- Tell me about yourself.
- Why do you think you are great fit for *X_ROLE*?
- Share your experience with *X_TECHNOLOGY_POSTED_ON_YOUR_RESUME*.

Then, make sure you *are prepared*

- Know the structure / time-length of the interview. 
  - Know if your interview is divided in x parts and how long is each part.
- Know the position you're interviewing for.
- Research about the company
- Prepare a list of study materials. Include videos, articles, courses etc.

Practice, practice, practice! Use HackerRank, LeetCode etc.

## The Flow: Follow It and You Will Cruise the Interview.

As you follow the flow below, sometimes we'll refer to my previous blog and the example coding challenge. So refer to it you need a refresher.

**Ask Questions**

- Any restrictions? Any additional info I need?
- What data structure, is it an array, object?
- Is data in sorted? Are there duplicates?
- Are you getting one data structure or two?
- **Repeat Questions**

**Talk the Solution**

- You can diagram an example data with as much info as possible.
  - Depict example in a more visual way. Here e.g line with years.
- Come up with brute force *DON'T CODE YET*. 
  - Go through all years, find alive and get highest population
  - Get min birth year and max death year. What's Big-O? O(N).
  - Have extra counter for number of peopleAlive ..etc

**Brute force**

- State brute force out-loud then code.
  - Ask clarifying questions what if X, what do I return?
  - Think about *unnecessary work*. E.g. do you need to check death year?
    - Death decrements population. Birth adds population.
    - Ask interviewer if they die that year does the death count that same year or following?
- Think about your data structure:
    - A table with years: 
    - E.g. 1750:1..etc.
    - Need your min and max birth year since birth is what increments.

**Refine solution with style**

- *Modularize code*
  - Each code one function.
  - It helps you focus on the *most interesting things to write* 
  - If you modularize you don't have to write all code.
  - As you code:
    - *Talk out loud* what each function is doing.
    - Test code.
    - Check for any math.
- Yes, *test* your code. Start with small test cases, then throw larger cases.

**Repeat after me**: *A solution (even brute force solution) is better than no solution*.

## K.O. Reminders

1. Listen, ask questions. **Look for clues**.
2. Draw and example. Big and with no special cases.
3. Create (*don't code*) a descriptive solution. Walk through example before coding. State **Brute force algorithm**, if you feel you can do better than brute-force do the latter if not do brute-force. Again, a solution, is better than no solution.
4. **State Run-Time, Big-O**
5. **Solidify your understanding of algorithm**
6. Code and optimize as needed.
7. Modularize as much as possible.
8. Test your code. Simple test cases, then bigger test cases.


## One Last Thing...

- Practice solving problems **without a text editor** and with a **time limit**.
- Mock interview with a friend.
- Brush up on things you don't know.
- Ask for clarifying questions
- **Focus on getting a working solution**. Done is better than perfect.
- You **won't know all the answers**
  - Don't be afraid of say 'I don't know'.
  - **Make an educated guess**.
- If you can, prepare your own questions ahead of time.


You've got this! 👊🏼